仲尼居，曾子侍。
Confucius was at home,and his disciple Zeng Zi was serving him while sitting on a mat.
子曰:「先王有至德要道，以顺天下，民用和睦，上下无怨，汝知之乎?」
Confucius asked Zeng Zi,“The Former Kings had a most important virtue that is an all-embracing way of conduct.It can make the world harmonious,the people practice peace and cordiality,and neither above nor below have resentment.Do you know what this virtue is?”
曾子避席曰:「参不敏，何足以知之?」
Zeng Zi rose from his mat reverently and replied:“I am not clever.I don’t know the answer.”
子曰：夫孝，德之本也，教之所由生也。复坐，吾语汝。
Confucius replied:This virtue is love.It is the foundation of virtues.It is the root from which all other virtues grow,and all teaching starts.Please sit down.I will explain it to you.
身体发肤，受之父母，不敢毁伤，孝之始也。
Everything in our body,from head to toe,is received from our parents.We dare not injure it.Love starts staying safe for the sake of loving our parents,because we know if we hurt ourselves,our parents would worry.
立身行道，扬名于后世，以显父母，孝之终也。
Love is fulfilled when we are self-reliant,become a virtuous role model of a family member,a citizen and a person for generations to come;live with righteous purpose,build our family name through values to glorify parents.
夫孝，始於事親，中於事君，終於立身。
Therefore,love is serving others.Love starts with service to parents;continues in service to leaders and nations;and is fulfilled with being a role model of values and virtues that brings the world in peace and harmony.
大雅云:『无念尔祖，聿修厥德。』」
The“Great Refined Odes”says:always think of your parents and ancestors,tell your family about their virtuous stories and practice those virtues yourself.
天子章第二
Chapter Two:The Rule of Love by Ruler
子曰:「爱亲者不敢恶于人，敬亲者不敢慢于人。」
Confucius said:He who loves his parents dare not do evil unto others;he who honors his parents dare not be contemptuous of others.
爱敬尽于事亲，而德教加于百姓，刑于四海。盖天子之孝也。
As a ruler,he rules people by love.When his love and honor are perfected in service to his parents,as everyone has parents,his model influence is shed on all the people and his exemplary leadership shines in all directions.This is rule by love.
「在上不骄，高而不危。制节谨度，满而不溢。高而不危，所以长守贵也。满而不溢，所以长守富也。富贵不离其身，然后能保其社稷，而和其民人。盖诸侯之孝也。《诗》云:『战战兢兢，如临深渊，如履薄冰。』」
A duke is a ruler in his state.He is in this high position so he has to exercise self-control so as to protect himself from falling.Call us and prule their states by virtue and ethics.Though they have highest power in their states,they are not bloated with pride.As they are responsible for managing their national treasury,with fairness and prudence,they avoid from greed and corruption.bring success.With these virtue of modesty and prudence,they can keep themselves in the higher social class of wealth and noble.
《孝经》:“身体发肤，受之父母，不敢毁伤，孝之始也。”
The National Treasury is responsible for managing South Africa's national government finances.
《孝经》:“立身行道，扬名于后世，以显父母，孝之终也。”
Social class shapes the attitudes that people hold about their abilities and responsibilities that,in turn,has important implications for how class hierarchies perpetuate from one generation to the next.This is the way to make his nation lasts and people in peace.This is the love of governors of states.
我们要自立自强，做有情有义有德有益于社会的人，身先士卒，替天行道，做对的事，让后人知道我们做的事，我们的父母会为我们而骄傲，他们就是在九泉之下也会欣慰。这样我们就圆满孝道了。
The Book of Poetry says:be extremely cautious,as if standing beside an abyss,as if walking on thin ice.
《孝经》:“夫孝，德之本也，教之所由生也。”
to leave a legacy in people’s lives and in science,and to pass the torch on to another generation.
孝敬父母是一切德行的根本，就像树木的根一样。由这个根才能生长出其他所有的美德。这就是扎根教育。
Our bodies–to every hair and bit of skin,from head to toe–are received by us from our parents,and we must not presume to injure or wound them.This is the beginning of filial piety.
（立身行道，如果没有孝这个根，就是无本之木，无源之水，长久不了，怎能行道呢？）
When all the virtues have been strongly rooted in our character and we practice justice in all its forms by giving to our parents filial love and honor,and giving to others what we owe them in the way of service,recompense,and material goods.our parents will be glorified.This is the completion of filial piety.
《孝经》:“天地之性，人为贵。人之行，莫大于孝。孝莫大于严父。严父莫大于配天，则周公其人也。”
“filial piety is the root of all virtue,and the stem out of which grows all moral teaching.This is the purpose of education.
